and as Israel's military winds down its
operation in the north of the Gaza Strip
some of the thousands of Palestinians
displaced from areas like jabalia are
heading back only to find there is
little left of the place they used to
call
home Israel's war against Hamas has
wiped out much of this
neighborhood for those who've returned
it's now a battle for
survival and everyone must pitch in to
to help gather the most basic of
needs we've had a hard time since the
beginning of the war all the basic
necessities are gone there is a lack of
everything there is no flour fuel sugar
and almost no water we do nothing but
fetch water all
day hyam says his family Cook just once
a day to conserve their Limited
supplies and as all around them the
threat of famine and disease grows
thoughts turn the devastating impact of
this war and the many no longer
here all of my cousins are dead my
wife's family is dead 36 people died in
one
swoop none of my children get any sleep
we lie and say that what they hear are
birds or that's it's a knock on the door
even if Rockets or mortars are falling
we try to reassure them but that's not
easy to do when surrounded by the scars
of
conflict this is where I used to sleep
now it's impossible to
sleep the cold is killing
us when we got back home I saw that my
room toys and bed had burned down I
don't have anything
left
and it's not just the buildings that lie
in
Ruins hope for the future is also
crumbling as fundamental differences
remain over a postwar future for
Palestinians and
Gaza and for more on this let's bring in
Shaya Lo from the Norwegian Refugee
Council which operates in Gaza she's
joining us from Jerusalem actually you
know we just saw in our report a family
uh that decided to go back to the north
of the Gaza Strip is it safe to do
that you know it's it it most likely
isn't safe to go because even if
hostilities have subsided or ceased in
Northern Gaza there's the risk of
unexploded ordinances reports have been
that as many as nine out of 10 bombs
have not exploded so when you have
families returning to Northern Gaza
before uh un or humanitarian agencies
have been able to go through and Ensure
that a an area is safe you run the risk
that people returning home who who
managed to survive over the last uh 15
weeks could could end up returning home
and finding that they're unexploded
ordinances in their homes and and facing
uh consequences such as uh those those
bombs being triggered and and killing or
Ming uh those seeking seeking safety and
seeking shelter and another danger
experts are warning of is uh hunger and
and famine which they say could kill
more people than the actual War and the
falling bombs what's being done to to
prevent
that this is something that we've been
concerned about for for many many weeks
uh even even before the spread of
disease as we've seen happen the UN has
already reported over 8,000 cases of
hepatitis A that have been reported due
to people being in unsanitary conditions
um uh really what we need to see is a
massive scaling up of Aid and assistance
going into Gaza in order to save off
starvation ensure that people are
getting uh the food that they
desperately need the clean water that
they desperately need uh the medicines
and medical supplies that they
desperately need unfortunately what
we've seen is that Israel has prevented
some of those essential uh Aid items
including water de de uh
desalinization uh Mach
uh and and uh chlorine tablets to purify
water uh from entering Gaza and so this
is something that's going to perpetuate
this Health crisis and so what we
desperately need is the lifting of these
uh obstructive obstructions and and
restrictions from allowing all necessary
Aid to enter Gaza and and and just
briefly if I may why is Israel blocking
the
aid you know I think that'd be a great
question to ask Israeli authorities uh
there are claims that some of this Aid
could be dual use but in terms of
medicines uh clean water these are
things that are necessary for the
civilian population to survive Israel as
the occupying power in Gaza since
1967 has an obligation to provide for
the basic needs for survival of the
occupied people what we've seen is that
they have not been abiding by that
obligation and they haven't been
allowing third States and and uh and and
independent noos uh International NOS
from entering and providing that
assistance if they're unwilling to do so
okay Shaya from the Norwegian Refugee
Council thank you so
much thank
you